FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS:

1. System should be able to collect metrics from metrics sources.
2. Collected metrics should be saved in storage.
3. User should be able to query metrics at different time granularities.
4. Alerts can be created on the metrics.

NFR:
1. Data collected should be accurate, reliable, and easily accessible.
2. constant heavy write load, while the read load is spiky.

Assumptions::
The data must be averaged every 10 minutes, which accounts for about 10 million operational metrics written per day,
and many metrics are collected at high frequency.


Identify the key metrics that need to be monitored.
For example:
website - need to monitor metrics such as page load time, user engagement, and server response time.
mobile app - need to monitor battery usage and network performance metrics.

Major components:

1. Metrics source - This can be application servers, SQL databases, message queues, etc.
2. Metrics/ Data collector -  Collects metrics data from different sources and writes data into the time-series database.
3. Time-series database - This stores metrics data as time series.
                        - It usually provides a custom-query interface for analyzing and summarizing a large amount of time-series data.
                        - It maintains indexes on labels to facilitate the fast lookup of data using the labels.
4. Query service: The query service makes it easy to query and retrieve data from the time-series databases.
5.Alerting system - analyzes the incoming data, detects anomalies and generates alerts.
                  - This sends alert notifications to various alerting destinations.
6. Visualization system - This shows metrics in the form of various graphs/charts. Visualization is built on top of the data layer. Metrics can be shown on the metrics dashboard over various time scales and alerts can be shown on the dashboard. A high-quality visualization system is hard to build. There's a strong argument for using an off-the-shelf system. For example, Grafana can be a very good system for this purpose.
7. Data transmission - transfers data from sources to the metrics monitoring system.

Data modelling:
Name	                                        Type
A metric name	                                String
A set of tags/labels	                        List of <key: value> pairs
An array of values and their timestamps	        An array of <value, timestamp> pairs

Storage:
1. SQL DB ?? not optimized for operations commonly performed against time-series data.
2. Normal general DB - can support time-series data -  but it will require extensive tuning to make it work on a large scale.
3. Popular time-series databases - Influx DB (database) and Prometheus,
   - Designed to store large volumes of time-series data and perform real time analysis.
   - Efficient aggregation.
   - Influx DB builds indexes on the labels to facilitate the fast lookup of time-series by labels.

Logic InDepth:

1. Metrics Collection??
    2 ways - push model, pull model

    Pull - e.g. Prometheus

    1. Metrics sources instances will self-register at startup over the known IP:Port of service discovery/registration cluster.
    2. Metrics collector can optionally register to changes with service discovery to receive an update whenever the service endpoint change.
    3. Metrics collector fetches configuration metadata of service endpoints from service discovery. Metadata includes pulling interval, IP addresses, timeout and retry parameters.
    4. Metrics collector pulls metrics data via a predefined HTTP endpoint.


    In a pull model, the metrics collector pulls the metrics from the sources. Consequently the metrics collector needs to know the complete list of service ends to pull the data.
    We can use a reliable, scalable and maintainable service like service discovery, provided by ETCD and Zookeeper.
    A service discovery contains configuration rules about when and where to collect the metrics.

    The metrics collector fetches the configuration metadata of service endpoint from service discovery.
    Metadata includes pulling interval, IP addresses, timeout and retry parameters.
    The metrics collector pulls the metric data using the HTTP endpoint (for example, web servers) or TCP (transmission control protocol) endpoint (for DB clusters).
    The metrics collector registers a change event notification with the service directory to get an update whenever the service endpoints change.

    Push - e.g. Graphite, Amazon Cloudwatch

    1. Clients send metrics to a centralized server via HTTP, gRPC, or Kafka.
    2. A collection agent is installed on every server being monitored. Agent collects metrics from the services running on the server and pushes those metrics periodically.
    - A collection agent is long-running software that collects the metrics from the service running on the server and pushes those metrics to the collector.
    3. To prevent metrics from falling behind in push model, metrics collector should be in an autoscale cluster with a load balancer.

Pull or push or both???

Push Monitoring System:

Advantages:
- Real-time notifications of issues and alerts
- Can alert multiple recipients at once.
- Can be customized to specific needs and requirements
- Can be integrated with other systems and applications

Disadvantages:
- Requires a constant and reliable internet connection to function properly
- Can be overwhelming with too many notifications and alerts
- Can be vulnerable to cyber-attacks and security breaches

Pull Monitoring System:

Advantages:
- Can be accessed remotely and for multiple devices
- Can be set up to check specific metrics and parameters at regular intervals
- Can be easily configured and customized
- Can provide detailed and historical data for analysis and reporting

Disadvantages:
- Requires manual intervention to check and review the data.
- May not provide the real-time alerts and notifications
- Can be less efficient in identifying and responding to issues and anomalies.


Scaling the metrics transmission pipeline
Whether we use the push or pull model, the metrics collector of servers and the cluster receive enormous amounts of data.
There's a risk of data loss if the time-series database is unavailable. To navigate through the risk of losing data, we can use a queueing component


In this design, the metrics collector sends metric data to a queuing system like Kafka. Then consumers or streaming processing services such as Apache Spark process and push the data to the time-series database. This approach has several advantages:

Kafka is used as a highly reliable and scalable distributed messaging platform.
It decouples the data collection and processing services from one another.
It can easily prevent data loss when the database is unavailable by retaining the data in Kafka.

2. How to save Metrics??

    1. Cassandra -> highly optimized for handling a large number of writes.
    2. Spark -> for batch processing to produce aggregations and save them back into the database.
         X But Batch processing can introduce significant delays. - Latency
    3. Metrics collector write Data into stream (via Kafka/ Kinesis) -
       A stream processor can then aggregate the data and push it to a time-series database. (e.g. influxDB, Prometheus, Amazon TimeStream)
       -> Write volume to the DB will significantly reduce.
       X Handling late arriving events could be a challenge.

       NOTE: We are performing aggregation before writing data to storage (ingestion pipeline).
       Aggregation can be done in two other ways:
       a) on the collection agent (push model), or
       b) at query time. However, aggregating at query time might result in slower query speeds.

Space optimization – In order to optimize the storage, following strategies can be used to tackle this problem:

1. Data encoding and compression:
    - Data encoding is the process of translating data from one format into another,
    typically for the purposes of efficient transmission or storage.
    - Data compression is a related process that involves reducing the amount of data required to represent a given piece of information.
    - Together data encoding and compression can significantly reduce the size of the data.
        It is the process of encoding, restructuring, or otherwise modifying data to reduce its size.
        Essentially, it involves re-encoding information with fewer bits than the original representation.

2. Downsampling: Downsampling is the process of reducing the number of samples in a dataset by removing some data points.
This is often done to reduce the amount of data that needs to be processed and to simply the analysis.
Downsampling can be done in a variety of ways, including randomly selecting a subset of the data points,
using a specific algorithm to select the data points, or using a specific sampling frequency to reduce the data.
If the data retention policy is set to one year, we can sample the data using the following example.

Retention: seven days, no sampling
Retention: 30 days, down sample to one minute resolution
Retention: one-year, down sample to one hour resolution

3. Query Metrics??

    The query service consists of a cluster of query servers
    that access the time-series databases and
    handle requests from visualization or alerting systems.
    By having dedicated query servers, we decouple the time-series databases from the clients (visualization and alerting systems),
    which adds flexibility to change the time-series database (e.g to OLAP database)
    or the visualization and alerting systems as needed.

    To reduce the load of the time-series database and make the query service more performant,
    cache servers can be added to store query results

4. Alert Flow
 The alert thresholds should be carefully chosen to ensure that they are sensitive enough to detect potential issues,
 but not so sensitive that they generate erroneous alerts.

      1. Load the config files to the cache servers. Rules are defined as config files on the disk.
      2. The alert manager fetches alert configs from the cache.
      3. Based on the config rules, the alert manager calls the query service at a predefined interval. If the value violates the threshold, an alert event is created. The alert manager is responsible for the following:
          - Filter, merge, and dedupe alerts.
          - Access control—to avoid human error and keep the system secure, it is essential to restrict access to certain alert management operations to authorized individuals only.
          - Retry—the alert manager checks alert states and ensures a notification is sent at least once.
          - The alert store is a key-value database such as Cassandra, that keeps the state (in-active, pending, firing, resolved) of all alerts. It ensures a notification is sent at least once.
          - Eligible alerts are inserted into a messaging and queuing system such as Kafka.
          - Alert consumers pull alert events from the messaging and queuing system.
          - Alert consumers process alert events from the messaging and queuing system and sends notifications to different channels such as email, text message, PageDuty, or HTTP endpoints.

    Rules are defined as config files.
    These rules are saved in the database

    1. The alert service fetches alert configs.
    2. Based on the config rules, the alert manager calls the query service at a pre-defined interval.
    3. If the value violates the threshold, an alert event is created.

    Sample config file:

    # "Datapoints to alarm" is the number of data points that must breach to
    # send an alarm to the ALARM state. "Evaluation periods" is the number of
    # most recent periods to evaluate when determining alarm state.

    Metric {
      metricName: "CPUUtilization"
      period: Duration.minutes(ONE_MIN), # each period is aggregated into one data point.
      Statistics: MAXIMUM
    }

    Alarm {
      AlertName: CPUAlarmHigh
      AlertDescription: 'Alarm if average cpu utilization greater than 70% of
                         reserved cpu for 6 1-minute periods out 10 1-minute period
                        ',
      Metric: "CPUUtilization"

      Statistics: Average
      EvaluationPeriods: 10 # Number of periods that are taken into account when the alarm is evaluated.
      DataPointsToAlarm: 6  # Number of data points that must be breaching to send the alarm into ALARM state.
      threshold: 80
      comparisonOperator: GREATER_THAN_THRESHOLD
      treatMissingData: BREACHING
    }

Time-Series DB (TSDB)
- These are specialized database systems optimized for handling time-stamped or time-series data efficiently.
- Optimized Storage:
    TSDB uses specialized storage formats tailored for this time-series data.
    This allows them to handle large volumes of data more efficiently compared to traditional databases.
- Fast Retrieval:
    TSDB are optimized for retrieving data based on time ranges or specific timestamps.
    It maintains indexes on labels to facilitate the fast lookup of time-series data by labels.
- Aggregation and Downsampling:
    They often support built-in aggregation allowing users to aggregate data over different time intervals (e.g., minutes, hours, days).
- Custom Query:
    They usually provide a custom query interface for analyzing and summarizing a large amount of time-series data.
- Streaming Data Support:
    Many TSDBs are capable of ingesting and processing streaming data in real-time,
     making them suitable for applications such as IoT, monitoring, and telemetry.
- Specialized Functions:
    They often provide specialized functions and operations tailored for time-series data analysis, such as
    interpolation, outlier detection, moving averages, and trend analysis.
- Integration with Analytical Tools:
    They typically integrate seamlessly with various analytical and visualization tools.


Service Registry and Discovery frameworks
Services like Zookeeper, consul and etcd are service registry/discovery frameworks. Core concept in all of them is same.

- They have set of nodes, typically 3 or 5, providing a key-value store.
- They provide set of libraries that allows service registration and discovery from this key-value store.
- They also provide features like ‘watches’ which notifies clients of any change for a particular key.
This feature is typically used to notify clients when new service instances are registered or instances fail.

Service discovery process

- Etcd exposes well knows IP addresses and ports.
- Service instances self-register at startup over these IP addresses and ports.
- Each key in etcd can be assigned a TTL (time to live) after which the key expires.
- It’s the duty of the service itself to update the TTL.
- If the service instance goes down, the key corresponding to the service instance will expire after the TTL that was set.
- If a client for the service has setup a watch for this service, the client is notified of the addition or removal.